Case Presentation:

  Dr. Michael T. Forrester (Medicine): A 54-year-old man was admitted to this hospital because of diarrhea, vomiting, and weight loss. The patient was well until approximately 2.5 years before admission, when abdominal cramping and nonbloody diarrhea developed 1 day after he flew from the Northeast to Colorado for a skiing trip; the symptoms persisted for the duration of his 4-day vacation. Four days after returning home, he went to the emergency department of another hospital because of persistent symptoms, where he was told he had a stomach virus. The next day, he saw his primary care provider, and ciprofloxacin was administered, without benefit. One month later, he saw a gastroenterologist. Routine laboratory studies were normal. A stool specimen showed many leukocytes and no ova or parasites; a stool assay for Clostridium difficile and a stool culture were negative. A course of metronidazole was administered for 10 days, and the symptoms nearly resolved. Two years before this admission, esophagogastroduodenoscopy reportedly revealed an inlet patch (i.e., an area of ectopic gastric mucosa) involving the circumference of the cervical esophagus and extending at least 4 cm in length, multiple erosions of the gastric antrum, antral gastritis, superficial ulcerations in the duodenum, and a prominent mucosal fold in the gastric side of the gastroesophageal junction. A colonoscopy showed several small polyps. Pathological examination of the biopsy specimens of the proximal portion of the esophagus reportedly showed squamous mucosa and gastric-type mucosa, with intestinal metaplasia that was thought to be consistent with Barrett's esophagus. Pathological examination of a biopsy specimen of a polyp in the transverse colon revealed adenomatous changes and low-grade dysplasia; a hyperplastic rectal polyp and normal fragments of duodenal mucosa were also seen. Testing for Helicobacter pylori and giardia was negative. Proton-pump inhibitors were prescribed. Nine months later, 1 day after another flight to Colorado, the patient again awoke with abdominal cramps and watery diarrhea (up to one episode per hour); 3 days later, nausea and vomiting developed. Examination of a stool specimen at that time revealed Blastocystis hominis, and the symptoms again resolved after treatment with metronidazole. Four months before admission, the patient traveled to the Middle East. While traveling, he stayed in hotels and drank only bottled water. The day after arrival, abdominal cramping developed, with watery, nonbloody diarrhea occurring every 1 to 2 hours during the day and occasionally awakening him at night. His discomfort increased with eating. On the sixth day, nausea and nonbloody, nonbilious vomiting (two to three episodes daily) occurred, in association with increased diarrhea and without fevers or diaphoresis. None of his 15 travel companions had symptoms. Twelve days later, the patient returned home. His symptoms persisted, and 3 weeks after their onset, he went to a second hospital for evaluation; intravenous fluids and metronidazole were administered, but the symptoms worsened. Examination of the stool for pathogens and screening for H. pylori were negative. During the next 3 months, anorexia developed, and the patient lost 15.9 kg. Approximately 2 weeks before admission, his physician prescribed trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole, with partial improvement of diarrhea. Eight days before admission, the patient was seen in the infectious-disease clinic of this hospital. On examination, the blood pressure was 114/86 mm Hg and the pulse was 88 beats per minute; the remainder of the physical examination was normal. The platelet count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, red-cell indexes, and serum levels of glucose, urea nitrogen, calcium, vitamin B12, C-reactive protein, cortisol, thyrotropin, amylase, and lipase were normal, as were the results of liver-function tests. Testing for IgA antibodies to gliadin, endomysial antigen, and tissue transglutaminase was negative; other test results are shown in Table 1. Stool specimens showed no enteric pathogens, ova, or parasites, and testing for C. difficile toxin was negative. During the ensuing week, the patient's symptoms worsened and included diarrhea (occurring hourly throughout the day), constant nausea, vomiting within 3 minutes after oral intake, and weakness, with orthostatic lightheadedness. He came to the emergency department of this hospital. The patient reported no fever, chills, sweats, flushing, or headache. His only medication was omeprazole, 20 mg daily, which he took for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux. He had no known allergies. He was of Ashkenazi (Eastern European) Jewish ancestry, worked in a service industry, and was monogamous with his girlfriend. He drank alcohol in moderation, had smoked as a young adult, and did not use illicit drugs. He had had no exposures to sick persons or animals and had no history of ingestion of unpasteurized milk products or raw meats. He had traveled annually to the Caribbean for 14 years, most recently 8 years before admission. His father was 82 years of age and had dementia, his mother was deceased and had a history of Parkinson's disease and heart disease, and an uncle reportedly had stomach cancer. On examination, the blood pressure was 133/94 mm Hg and the pulse 120 beats per minute; the temperature, respirations, and oxygen saturation while the patient was breathing ambient air were normal, as was the remainder of the examination. The platelet count, activated partial-thromboplastin time, and serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and prealbumin were normal, as were the results of liver-function tests; other test results are shown in Table 1. An electrocardiogram was normal. Normal saline was infused. The patient was admitted to this hospital. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis after the oral and intravenous administration of contrast material showed thickening and enhancement of the proximal small-bowel walls, mild dilatation in the small bowel, a large amount of fluid in the small bowel and colon with air–fluid levels, an enlarged retroperitoneal node (1.3 cm in the short axis), calcific atherosclerosis of the aorta, and a ground-glass nodule (0.7 cm in diameter) in the lower lobe of the right lung. Omeprazole, prochlorperazine, and ondansetron hydrochloride were administered, and additional crystalloid solution was infused intravenously. Urinalysis revealed 1+ ketones and albumin and was otherwise normal. During the next 2 days, levels of erythropoietin and folate were found to be normal, and testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies was negative; other test results are shown in Table 1. Stool studies were again unrevealing. On the fourth day, the level of potassium in the stool was 21.7 mmol per liter (serum level, 3.4 mmol per liter) and stool fat was 37% (reference range, 0 to 19). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed erosive or exudative circumferential lesions (grade III esophagitis, according to the modified Savary–Miller classification, which consists of grades I through V, with grade V indicating the metaplasia seen in Barrett's esophagus); excessive fluid (1600 ml) in the gastric body; a partially obstructing duodenal ulcer (30 mm in the largest dimension) in the duodenal bulb, with an ulcer crater that was suspicious for perforation; and multiple ulcers, up to 6 mm in the largest dimension, in the second part of the duodenum. Pathological examination of biopsy specimens of the edges of the partially obstructing duodenal ulcer showed duodenal mucosa with ulceration, foveolar metaplasia, and hyperplasia of the Brunner's glands, with no evidence of malignant cells. Gram's staining of an aspirate of the duodenum revealed few polymorphonuclear cells and few yeast forms; no ova or parasites were seen. Cultures of the duodenal aspirate grew Candida albicans and three colony types of alpha-hemolytic streptococcus. Diagnostic procedures were performed.

Differential Diagnosis:
  Dr. Leigh H. Simmons: May we review the imaging studies? A coronal reformatted image from a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis (Panel A) shows multiple thickened loops of small bowel (small arrowheads), thickening of the gastric rugae (large arrowhead), and an ulceration of the first portion of the duodenum (arrow). An axial image from a contrast-enhanced CT examination of the abdomen and pelvis (Panel B) shows loops of thickened proximal small bowel with thickened valvulae conniventes (arrowheads). In addition, a homogeneously enhancing exophytic mass arising from the uncinate process and head of the pancreas is seen during the arterial phase (arrow).  Dr. Alexander R. Guimaraes: An axial and coronal reformatted image from a contrast-enhanced CT examination reveals a fluid-filled, distended stomach with thickened gastric rugae (Figure 1A). This pattern is noted in the duodenum and jejunum as well, where there are thickened loops of small bowel with mild dilatation as compared with other normal loops of small bowel. The differential considerations for this finding include ischemia, vasculitis, infectious and inflammatory enteritides, ingestion (particularly acidic materials), hemorrhage, and trauma. Ulceration is noted within the duodenal bulb. The fluid distention of the small bowel combined with the contrast enhancement of the bowel makes this finding suggestive of a mass. On the axial image, a mass is noted in the uncinate process and head of the pancreas (Figure 1B). The mass has homogeneous enhancement. Pertinent negative findings include an absence of pancreatic atrophy, pancreatic ductal dilatation, and intrahepatic ductal dilatation. Differential considerations for duodenal ulcers include acid exposure, acid-producing tumors (the Zollinger–Ellison syndrome), or peptic ulcer disease. In addition, the differential considerations for solid tumors of the pancreas should always include pancreatic adenocarcinoma, metastases (most commonly from renal-cell carcinoma or melanoma, and occasionally from ovarian cancer), and neuroendocrine tumors. Classic findings for pancreatic adenocarcinoma include ductal dilatation of the pancreas, biliary dilatation, and jaundice, and this patient had none of those. Therefore, the pertinent negative findings associated with this case steer us away from a diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.  Dr. Simmons: This 54-year-old man had a 2.5-year history of a recurrent diarrheal illness, intermittent abdominal pains, and Barrett's esophagus. He had a rapidly worsening clinical course, with severe diarrhea, vomiting, and clinically significant weight loss, and required hospitalization. This patient's initial episodes of diarrheal illness were typical of acute gastroenteritis, for which a definite cause is often not identified. Most acute diarrheal episodes (those lasting >7 days) are caused by self-limited bacterial or viral infections; more prolonged courses of acute diarrheal illness are caused by protozoans, including cryptosporidium and Giardia lamblia.1  During the patient's second diarrheal illness, the finding of B. hominis in the stool specimen was of debatable clinical relevance. This organism is commonly found in stool samples, and the response to treatment is variable.2,3 Thus, his improvement after treatment suggests that he may have had a symptomatic B. hominis infection, although we cannot be certain that this was the cause of his illness. At this point, the main diagnostic considerations include recurrent infectious gastroenteritis or the initial presentation of inflammatory bowel disease. The initial endoscopic studies revealed no evidence of colitis, but the upper endoscopy revealed erosions of the gastric antrum and duodenum. Crohn's disease should be considered, because small-bowel involvement in patients with Crohn's disease can cause a large-volume, watery diarrheal illness. During the last 4 months before this patient's hospitalization, he had an acceleration of his clinical course. Therefore, the differential diagnosis for his illness must broaden to include the causes of chronic diarrhea, which is defined as diarrheal illness lasting for more than 4 weeks.4  There are many causes of chronic diarrhea (Table 2). The patient's medical history should be reassessed, and a review of systems should be performed, with particular attention given to any signs or symptoms of a systemic illness that is associated with diarrhea. The major causes of chronic diarrhea can be assessed by combining a patient's history and classification of the stool (inflammatory, fatty, or watery). This patient had no blood in his stools and little evidence of inflammation or infection, and endoscopic evaluation 2 years before admission revealed no conclusive evidence of inflammatory bowel disease. Celiac disease should be considered, given his weight loss and diarrhea, but he did not have greasy or malodorous stools, and tests for IgA antibodies to endomysial antigen and tissue transglutaminase were negative.5,6 Finally, examination of the patient's duodenal-biopsy specimen did not show the villous atrophy that is the signature pathological feature of celiac disease.7 His clinical picture is most notable for chronic watery stools. Measurement of the stool for electrolyte levels is informative in this case, as is calculation of the stool osmotic gap (the difference between stool osmolality, in milliosmoles per kilogram of water, and twice the sum of the stool sodium and potassium levels, in millimoles per liter). A stool osmotic gap8 of less than 50 strongly suggests a secretory diarrhea, and an osmotic gap of more than 125 suggests osmotic diarrhea; this patient's calculated stool osmotic gap was in the low-intermediate range at 70, with a high level of sodium in the stool, suggesting that a secretory process is more likely than osmotic diarrhea. The differential diagnosis of secretory diarrhea includes infections, structural diseases, endocrinopathy, and peptide-secreting tumors. An infectious cause of secretory diarrhea has been satisfactorily ruled out. Structural bowel disease, including intestinal and pancreatic tumors and inflammatory bowel disease, should be evaluated with CT of the abdomen, small-bowel enteroscopy, and colonoscopy. This patient was appropriately evaluated for the most common endocrinologic causes of diarrhea, including diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, and adrenal insufficiency. Systemic mastocytosis could be a unifying diagnosis for peptic ulcer disease and diarrhea; however, the absence of a history of urticaria and the absence of findings of mast-cell infiltration on examination of the previous esophageal-biopsy specimens make this diagnosis unlikely.9  A rare, but important, class of chronic secretory diarrheal illnesses is caused by peptide-secreting tumors. Because these tumors are uncommon, a critical approach to the patient's history and other clinical features is essential before laboratory testing for these peptides is undertaken. The screening panels for these tumors are far more likely to produce false positive than true positive results.4  The major peptide-secreting tumors to be considered in this patient are carcinoid tumor, vasoactive intestinal peptide–producing tumor (VIPoma), and gastrinoma. The absence of flushing makes carcinoid tumor less likely. VIPoma is classically associated with profound hypokalemia and hypochlorhydria, which were not present.10  Gastrinoma warrants serious consideration. On the patient's second upper endoscopy, the finding of a large duodenal ulcer with a crater, as well as multiple smaller ulcers, raises concern for gastric-acid hypersecretion. This patient had a negative test for H. pylori antibody and did not use nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, ruling out the two most common causes of peptic ulcer disease.11 Ulcers developed despite his regular use of a proton-pump inhibitor, which is an unusual finding that deserves further investigation.  Gastrinoma, a rare tumor of the pancreas and duodenum, causes ectopic hypersecretion of gastrin and results in the hypersecretion of gastric acid, leading to severe peptic ulcer disease; this complex of findings is known as the Zollinger–Ellison syndrome12 and is often accompanied by esophageal reflux disease and diarrhea. I am particularly mindful that on this patient's first upper endoscopy (2 years before admission), mention was made of a prominent gastric fold, an unusual finding. In one series, a prominent gastric fold was found in more than 90% of patients with the Zollinger–Ellison syndrome. 13 The factors that contribute to gastrinoma-associated diarrhea are a high volume of gastric acid; inactivation of pancreatic digestive enzymes by gastric acid, causing steatorrhea; and inhibition of sodium and water reabsorption by the small intestine, causing a secretory diarrhea. 10   Gastrinoma is slightly more common in men than in women, and the age at onset is generally between 41 and 53 years of age. 10 On average, the diagnosis is made 5 years after the onset of symptoms.13 This patient was 51 years of age at the onset of his symptoms, which is typical.  Twenty to 25% of patients with gastrinoma have the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN-1) syndrome. Almost all patients with MEN-1 have primary hyperparathyroidism. 13,14 I would review this patient's history for any previous episodes of kidney stones and for a family history of endocrine tumors. Since this patient's calcium levels remained normal, even when he was in a volume-depleted state, it is unlikely that he had hyperparathyroidism.  Testing for gastrinoma starts with measurement of a fasting serum gastrin level. The gastrin level is elevated in virtually all patients with the Zollinger–Ellison syndrome; therefore, a normal level essentially rules out this condition. However, our measurements could be confounded by the patient's recent use of proton-pump inhibitors, which can raise the fasting gastrin levels markedly.15 This patient's gastric-outlet obstruction could also raise gastrin levels, as could peptic ulcer disease itself. In this circumstance, it would be helpful to either stop the proton-pump inhibitors for a week before measuring gastrin (which could present a therapeutic challenge because of the severe peptic ulcer disease) or perform a provocative test involving the intravenous injection of secretin and the subsequent measurement of the gastrin level. I would first perform a fasting gastrin test, and if it is elevated, I would perform a secretin stimulation test. A gastrin level that increases by more than 120 pg per milliliter in response to secretin is diagnostic of a gastrinoma. 16  Furthermore, on review of this patient's imaging studies, we learn that there was concern about a pancreatic mass. Such a finding, in combination with the patient's clinical presentation, makes gastrinoma the most likely explanation for the illness. In addition to measurement of a fasting serum gastrin level, I suspect that a biopsy of the pancreatic mass was also performed.  Dr. Eric S. Rosenberg (Pathology): May we have the medical students' diagnosis?  Harvard Medical School Student: Our top considerations were a neuroendocrine tumor, infectious diarrhea, or an autoimmune gastrointestinal disease such as inflammatory bowel disease or celiac disease. Given the patient's history of chronic secretory diarrhea, multiple peptic ulcers, and Barrett's esophagus, we favor gastrinoma as the most likely diagnosis.  Dr. Rosenberg: Dr. Forrester, what was your clinical impression when you saw this patient?  Dr. Forrester: We initially focused on infection and inflammatory bowel disease as possible causes of his syndrome. We were also intrigued by the association of the diarrhea with air travel and wondered whether changes in atmospheric pressure had a role in unmasking his symptoms. However, we were most concerned about the pancreatic mass and thought a neuroendocrine tumor was likely.
